# Study paper [Type-and-Example-Directed Program Synthesis](https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/2737924.2738007)

* Rather than just type information, the algorithm also uses concrete input-output examples to dramatically cut down the size of the search space
* For instance, let the inputs include a type signature, the definitions of any needed auxiliary functions, a synthesis goal specified by 
  * function name
  * I\O types
  * I\O examples
* Combining types and examples relies on the type structure of the PL to avoid ill-typed terms. Need to modify the typing rules so that they push examples toward sthe leaves of the typing derivation trees.
* Evaluate candidate terms early in the search process, thereby rpruning the search space combinatorially.
* Decompose the problem into independent sub-problems
* Invent an ML-like type system that incoporates I\O examples to constrain the set of legal program derivations.
* The type system is a non-deterministic specification of the synthesis problem where the goal is to find a term that has a valid typing derivation
  * Type system decomposes into a data structure (refinement tree) that concretize the parts of the search space that are shared among many candidate solutions
  * As well as an enumerative search that fills in the remaining holes.
* `Type refinement` turns the I\O examples into instantiations that match the respective types in the top-level structure
* `Guessing` fills in the body of the structure a term of which the type matches that of the output. Since no existing single type constructor satisfies the I/O examples, the synthesizer needs to enumearte or guess well-typed terms that involve vairables in beta-normal forms that cannot be reduced further
* `Match refinement` matches the possibilities with reality after exhausting all the options. Use a pattern match expression and leverage the existing terms to match each single I\O example.
  * For each example, a pattern is matched. Then this example is ruled out temporarily. Thereby, the I\O type instantiation set is refined.
  * After the first round of pattern matching, the second round of pattern matching starts nested in the matched patterns in the first round. Thus, a recursive function can be introduced.
  * `Enumeration`: choose a particular term shape; recursively generate its components
    * Generate an application: generate a function that produces the desired goal type; then generate a compatible argument
    * Generate a variable: choose any variable from the context of the appropriate type
  * Enforce two restrictiosn to ensure termination of evaluation:
    * syntactica structural recursion check enforces sturcturally decreasing arguments
    * positivity restriction on data types prevents recursive occurrences of a data type to the left of an arrow in the type of an argument to a constructor
  * To detect an inconsistent example set is to generate terms up to the size of the guaranteed program whose size is proportional to the size and amount of I\O examples. If any of these programs is SAT, then the example set is consistent. Otherwise, it is inconsistent. The size of the guaranteed program serves as an upper bound to the synthesis algorithm.
  * Guessing terms of certain type is raw E-term enumeration coupled with evaluation
    * Define a term generation function to enumerate E-term sets. Cache the results of guesing at a particular goal type so that enumeration will not be repeated. When context grows, create invocations of generation functions that maximize sharing of the context.
  * In `refinement tree`, there are two types of nodes: goal nodes contain goal types and represent places in the synthesis derivation where one can guess E term; refinement nodes represent valid I-refinement and produce branches for sub-problems.
    * Create a refinement tree from the initial context, goal type and provided examples
    * Guess beta-normal terms at each node
    * Bubble sucessful E-guesses and refined nullary constants upwards in the tree to construct a program that fits the goal
    
# Study paper [Program Synthesis using Abstraction Refinement](https://arxiv.org/pdf/1710.07740.pdf)

* Construct abstract program with abstract semantics. If the specification certifies the program UNSAT, refine the abstraction to make sure that this abstract program is spurious.
* `Finite Tree Automata (FTA)`: a tuple $A=(Q,F,Q_f,\Delta)$ where $Q$ is the state space, $Q_f\subset Q$ is a set of final states, $\Delta$ is a set of transitions (rewrte rule) of the form $f(q_1, \ldots, q_n)\rightarrow q$ where $q_1,\ldots, q_n\in Q$ and $f\in F$.
* Every $f\in F$ has an arity(rank) associated. A rank may contain multiple symbols.
* If terms over alphabet $F$ reaches $q\in Q_f$ via rewrite rules in $\Delta$, then they are accepted and constitute the languate $L(A)$
* During synthesis, first construct an abstract FTA using the given predicate sets. If the language of the AFTA is empty, then it proves that there is no DSL program that fit the I\O examples; otherwise, use a ranking algorithm to choose a best program that is accepted by the current AFTA. 
* Each programs are represented as abstract syntax trees where each node is labeled with the corresponding DSL construct.
* Once obtained an accepted program, run it on the I\O examples, if the results matches the examples, then this program is the output; otherwise, refine the abstraction so that the spurious program is no longer accepted by the refined AFTA.
* CEGAR: once a spurious program is spotted, add a single I/O example that is inconsistent with the program. Construct a proof of incorrectness of the program w.r.t the cex. The proof is a mapping from AST nodes in the program to abstract values over the abstract universe of the predicates.
* The proof is a pieces in the current abstraction that contains the overapproximations of every piece of the program
* The construction of proof
 * Represent the spurious program as an AST with vertices; consider an I\O example that falsifies this program
 * Output is a mapping from the AST vertices to new abstract values proving that the program is inconsistent with the I\O example
 * The AST is processed top-down from the root node where the example output must not reside in the concretization of the node. Find an annotation annotation (mapping) for this root vertex. Add the root node to worklist and find suitable annotations for the children of all nodes in the worklist.
 * To find the annotation for a root node, first compute the node's abstract value by symbolically execute the program on the example input using the abstract transformers. Then strengthen this abstract value via conjunction with a new formula over the predicate universe. The conjunction is the proof.
  * The strengthen process returns the most general conjunctive formula using at most certain number of predicates in the predicate universe.
   * Find subset of the predicate universe where all predicates overapproximate the abstract value
   * Find the predicates such that the intersection between the predicate and the abstract value does not contain the example output
* Refine the abstraction by adding the proof to the current abstraction
 * The spurious program cannot exist in the refined abstraction
 * The previous abstraction is an overapproximation of the refined abstraction
  
